README.md, before:

# CS 4320 PA3: Game Playing with UCT

## Project Overview

This project implements Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) algorithms for playing Connect Four. The implementation includes three distinct algorithms: Uniform Random (UR), Pure Monte Carlo Game Search (PMCGS), and Upper Confidence Bound for Trees (UCT). Additionally! a comprehensive tournament system evaluates the performance of these algorithms against each other.

## Authors

- **Bryan Perez**:
  - Game board representation and move validation
  - Terminal state detection algorithms
  - UR, PMCGS, and UCT algorithm implementations
  - Command-line interface development

- **Ethan Duarte**:
  - Tournament system design and validation
  - Performance optimization
  - Experimental evaluation and analysis
  - Documentation and reporting

## Project Structure

```
cs4320-pa3-connect-four/
├── src/
│   ├── connect_four.py              # Main implementation with all algorithms
│   ├── tournament_runner.py         # Full tournament runner (500/10000 sims)
│   └── fast_tournament_runner.py    # Fast tournament runner (50 sims)
├── tests/
│   ├── test_basic.py                # Basic functionality tests
│   └── test_tournament.py           # Tournament system tests
├── data/
│   ├── test1.txt                    # UR algorithm test case
│   ├── test2.txt                    # PMCGS algorithm test case
│   └── test3.txt                    # UCT algorithm test case
├── docs/
│   └── PA3_Game_Playing.pdf         # Original assignment specification
└── README.md                        # This file
```

## Implementation Details

### Game Representation

The Connect Four game is represented using a 7×6 grid, where:
- **Columns**: 7 (indexed 0-6)
- **Rows**: 6 (indexed 0-5)
- **Players**: Red ('R', minimizing player, win value = -1) and Yellow ('Y', maximizing player, win value = +1)
- **Empty spaces**: Represented by 'O'
- **Terminal states**: Win (+1/-1), Draw (0), or ongoing

### Algorithms Implemented

#### 1. Uniform Random (UR)
- **Description**: Selects moves uniformly at random from all legal positions
- **Parameters**: None (parameter value should be 0)
- **Complexity**: O(1) per move selection
- **Use case**: Baseline algorithm for comparison

#### 2. Pure Monte Carlo Game Search (PMCGS)
- **Description**: Uses random playouts from the current state to estimate move values
- **Parameters**: Number of simulations per move
- **Tree structure**: Builds search tree with random selection at all levels
- **Output**: Estimated win probabilities for each column

#### 3. Upper Confidence Bound for Trees (UCT)
- **Description**: Sophisticated MCTS using UCB formula for tree traversal
- **Parameters**: Number of simulations per move
- **Selection**: UCB = exploitation + exploration_constant × √(ln(parent_visits) / node_visits)
- **Expansion**: Adds new nodes when fully expanded nodes are reached
- **Simulation**: Random playouts from leaf nodes
- **Backpropagation**: Updates win/loss statistics up the tree

### Key Design Decisions

1. **Efficient Board Management**: Do/undo move operations avoid costly board copying
2. **Memory Optimization**: MCTS nodes store only essential statistics (wins, visits)
3. **Win Detection**: Optimized to check only lines containing the last move
4. **Command-Line Interface**: Follows assignment specifications exactly
5. **Performance Considerations**: Tournament system designed for scalability

## Usage Instructions

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.8+ (tested on 3.13)
- Optional but recommended: virtual environment (below)

```bash
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install pytest  # optional, only needed for running the automated tests
```

### Part I: Algorithm Testing

#### Running Individual Algorithms

```bash
Navigate to the project directory

# Test UR algorithm
python3 src/connect_four.py data/test1.txt Verbose 0

# Test PMCGS with 500 simulations
python3 src/connect_four.py data/test2.txt Brief 500

# Test UCT with 10000 simulations
python3 src/connect_four.py data/test3.txt Brief 10000
```

#### Command Line Parameters

```
python3 src/connect_four.py <input_file> <verbosity> <parameter>

<input_file>: Path to game state file
<verbosity>: Verbose | Brief | None
<parameter>: Algorithm-specific parameter (0 for UR, simulation count for MCTS)
```

#### Verbosity Levels

- **Verbose**: Detailed output including simulation traces, UCB values, node additions, rollouts, and the final move.
- **Brief**: Quiet search plus the per-column `wi/ni` summaries and final move selection.
- **None**: Fully silent (no column table, no final move). Use this for tournaments or benchmarking to match the assignment requirement of suppressing output during automated play.

### Part II: Tournament Experiments

#### Running Full Tournament (Recommended for Assignment)

```bash
# Run the required 100 games per pairing (25 matchups total)
python3 src/tournament_runner.py 100
```

`tournament_runner.py` automatically runs the five required variants (UR, PMCGS‑500, PMCGS‑10000, UCT‑500, UCT‑10000), alternates colors so that each pairing splits first-move advantage, and writes a win-percentage matrix to `tournament_results.txt`. Passing a smaller `num_games` (e.g., 30) is acceptable for interim experiments—just document any deviation from the official 100-game requirement in your report.

#### Running Fast Tournament (For Development/Testing)

```bash
# Run fast tournament with 50 simulations and 10 games per pair
python3 src/fast_tournament_runner.py 10
```

The fast runner subclasses the main tournament logic but locks every MCTS configuration to 50 simulations. Use this when iterating locally; the console and `fast_tournament_results.txt` still show the same win-percentage table format as the full tournament.

### Running Tests

```bash
# Run basic functionality tests
python3 tests/test_basic.py

# Run tournament system smoke tests
python3 tests/test_tournament.py

# Or run the entire suite with pytest (recommended if installed)
pytest
```

## Experimental Results

### Performance Expectations

Based on our benchmarking:
- **50 simulations**: ~0.05 seconds per move
- **500 simulations**: ~0.25 seconds per move
- **10,000 simulations**: ~5 seconds per move

Tournament completion times:
- Fast tournament (50 sims, 10 games): ~45 seconds
- Scaled tournament (500 sims, 30 games): ~15-20 minutes
- Full tournament (10k sims, 100 games): ~24-30 hours

### Expected Algorithm Performance

Our preliminary results show:
1. **UR**: Baseline random performance (~50% win rate)
2. **PMCGS**: Improved performance with more simulations
3. **UCT**: Best performance due to intelligent tree search
4. **Scaling**: Performance improves significantly with simulation count

## Implementation Validation

### Testing Strategy

1. **Unit Tests**: Individual algorithm correctness
2. **Integration Tests**: End-to-end game play
3. **Performance Tests**: Timing and scalability analysis
4. **Tournament Tests**: Multi-algorithm comparison

### Validation Results

- Board operations (move, undo, validation)
- Win condition detection (horizontal, vertical, diagonal)
- Algorithm implementations (UR, PMCGS, UCT)
- Command-line interface compliance
- Tournament system functionality

## Performance Optimizations

### Memory Efficiency
- MCTS nodes contain minimal state (wi, ni values only)
- Board state managed through do/undo operations
- No unnecessary object copying

### Computational Efficiency
- Win detection limited to lines through last move
- Tree reuse across simulations
- Configurable simulation counts for scalability

### Known Limitations
- High simulation counts create computational bottlenecks
- Tournament runtime scales quadratically with simulation count
- Memory usage grows with tree depth

## Future Improvements

1. **Parallel Processing**: Distribute simulations across CPU cores
2. **Neural Network Integration**: Replace random playouts with learned evaluation
3. **Transposition Tables**: Cache previously evaluated positions
4. **Advanced UCT**: Dynamic exploration constants and move ordering

## References

- [Monte Carlo Tree Search Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monte_Carlo_tree_search)
- Course slides and textbook materials
- Assignment specification (PA3_Game_Playing.pdf)

---

Commit message:

Add parallel tournament execution options

README.md, after:

# CS 4320 PA3: Game Playing with UCT

## Project Overview

This project implements Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) algorithms for playing Connect Four. The implementation includes three distinct algorithms: Uniform Random (UR), Pure Monte Carlo Game Search (PMCGS), and Upper Confidence Bound for Trees (UCT). Additionally! a comprehensive tournament system evaluates the performance of these algorithms against each other.

## Authors

- **Bryan Perez**:
  - Game board representation and move validation
  - Terminal state detection algorithms
  - UR, PMCGS, and UCT algorithm implementations
  - Command-line interface development

- **Ethan Duarte**:
  - Tournament system design and validation
  - Performance optimization
  - Experimental evaluation and analysis
  - Documentation and reporting

## Project Structure

```
cs4320-pa3-connect-four/
├── src/
│   ├── connect_four.py              # Main implementation with all algorithms
│   ├── tournament_runner.py         # Full tournament runner (500/10000 sims)
│   └── fast_tournament_runner.py    # Fast tournament runner (50 sims)
├── tests/
│   ├── test_basic.py                # Basic functionality tests
│   └── test_tournament.py           # Tournament system tests
├── data/
│   ├── test1.txt                    # UR algorithm test case
│   ├── test2.txt                    # PMCGS algorithm test case
│   └── test3.txt                    # UCT algorithm test case
├── docs/
│   └── PA3_Game_Playing.pdf         # Original assignment specification
└── README.md                        # This file
```

## Implementation Details

### Game Representation

The Connect Four game is represented using a 7×6 grid, where:
- **Columns**: 7 (indexed 0-6)
- **Rows**: 6 (indexed 0-5)
- **Players**: Red ('R', minimizing player, win value = -1) and Yellow ('Y', maximizing player, win value = +1)
- **Empty spaces**: Represented by 'O'
- **Terminal states**: Win (+1/-1), Draw (0), or ongoing

### Algorithms Implemented

#### 1. Uniform Random (UR)
- **Description**: Selects moves uniformly at random from all legal positions
- **Parameters**: None (parameter value should be 0)
- **Complexity**: O(1) per move selection
- **Use case**: Baseline algorithm for comparison

#### 2. Pure Monte Carlo Game Search (PMCGS)
- **Description**: Uses random playouts from the current state to estimate move values
- **Parameters**: Number of simulations per move
- **Tree structure**: Builds search tree with random selection at all levels
- **Output**: Estimated win probabilities for each column

#### 3. Upper Confidence Bound for Trees (UCT)
- **Description**: Sophisticated MCTS using UCB formula for tree traversal
- **Parameters**: Number of simulations per move
- **Selection**: UCB = exploitation + exploration_constant × √(ln(parent_visits) / node_visits)
- **Expansion**: Adds new nodes when fully expanded nodes are reached
- **Simulation**: Random playouts from leaf nodes
- **Backpropagation**: Updates win/loss statistics up the tree

### Key Design Decisions

1. **Efficient Board Management**: Do/undo move operations avoid costly board copying
2. **Memory Optimization**: MCTS nodes store only essential statistics (wins, visits)
3. **Win Detection**: Optimized to check only lines containing the last move
4. **Command-Line Interface**: Follows assignment specifications exactly
5. **Performance Considerations**: Tournament system designed for scalability

## Usage Instructions

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.8+ (tested on 3.13)
- Optional but recommended: virtual environment (below)

```bash
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install pytest  # optional, only needed for running the automated tests
```

### Part I: Algorithm Testing

#### Running Individual Algorithms

```bash
Navigate to the project directory

# Test UR algorithm
python3 src/connect_four.py data/test1.txt Verbose 0

# Test PMCGS with 500 simulations
python3 src/connect_four.py data/test2.txt Brief 500

# Test UCT with 10000 simulations
python3 src/connect_four.py data/test3.txt Brief 10000
```

#### Command Line Parameters

```
python3 src/connect_four.py <input_file> <verbosity> <parameter>

<input_file>: Path to game state file
<verbosity>: Verbose | Brief | None
<parameter>: Algorithm-specific parameter (0 for UR, simulation count for MCTS)
```

#### Verbosity Levels

- **Verbose**: Detailed output including simulation traces, UCB values, node additions, rollouts, and the final move.
- **Brief**: Quiet search plus the per-column `wi/ni` summaries and final move selection.
- **None**: Fully silent (no column table, no final move). Use this for tournaments or benchmarking to match the assignment requirement of suppressing output during automated play.

### Part II: Tournament Experiments

#### Running Full Tournament (Recommended for Assignment)

```bash
# Run the required 100 games per pairing (25 matchups total)
python3 src/tournament_runner.py 100

# Leverage multiple CPU cores to shorten long runs
python3 src/tournament_runner.py 100 --workers 4
```

`tournament_runner.py` automatically runs the five required variants (UR, PMCGS‑500, PMCGS‑10000, UCT‑500, UCT‑10000), alternates colors so that each pairing splits first-move advantage, and writes a win-percentage matrix to `tournament_results.txt`. Passing a smaller `num_games` (e.g., 30) is acceptable for interim experiments—just document any deviation from the official 100-game requirement in your report. Supplying `--workers N` enables multi-process execution where each worker simulates independent games; results are deterministic relative to the sequential version, but the wall-clock time drops roughly in proportion to the number of CPU cores available.

#### Running Fast Tournament (For Development/Testing)

```bash
# Run fast tournament with 50 simulations and 10 games per pair
python3 src/fast_tournament_runner.py 10

# Optional: parallelize the fast runner as well
python3 src/fast_tournament_runner.py 20 --workers 4
```

The fast runner subclasses the main tournament logic but locks every MCTS configuration to 50 simulations. Use this when iterating locally; the console and `fast_tournament_results.txt` still show the same win-percentage table format as the full tournament.

### Running Tests

```bash
# Run basic functionality tests
python3 tests/test_basic.py

# Run tournament system smoke tests
python3 tests/test_tournament.py

# Or run the entire suite with pytest (recommended if installed)
pytest
```

## Experimental Results

### Performance Expectations

Based on our benchmarking:
- **50 simulations**: ~0.05 seconds per move
- **500 simulations**: ~0.25 seconds per move
- **10,000 simulations**: ~5 seconds per move (single core)

Tournament completion times:
- Fast tournament (50 sims, 10 games): ~45 seconds (single core)
- Scaled tournament (500 sims, 30 games): ~15-20 minutes
- Full tournament (10k sims, 100 games): ~24-30 hours on one core, ~6-8 hours with `--workers 4`

### Expected Algorithm Performance

Our preliminary results show:
1. **UR**: Baseline random performance (~50% win rate)
2. **PMCGS**: Improved performance with more simulations
3. **UCT**: Best performance due to intelligent tree search
4. **Scaling**: Performance improves significantly with simulation count

## Implementation Validation

### Testing Strategy

1. **Unit Tests**: Individual algorithm correctness
2. **Integration Tests**: End-to-end game play
3. **Performance Tests**: Timing and scalability analysis
4. **Tournament Tests**: Multi-algorithm comparison

### Validation Results

- Board operations (move, undo, validation)
- Win condition detection (horizontal, vertical, diagonal)
- Algorithm implementations (UR, PMCGS, UCT)
- Command-line interface compliance
- Tournament system functionality

## Performance Optimizations

### Memory Efficiency
- MCTS nodes contain minimal state (wi, ni values only)
- Board state managed through do/undo operations
- No unnecessary object copying

### Computational Efficiency
- Win detection limited to lines through last move
- Tree reuse across simulations
- Configurable simulation counts for scalability

### Known Limitations
- High simulation counts create computational bottlenecks
- Tournament runtime scales quadratically with simulation count (parallel mode mitigates but does not eliminate this)
- Memory usage grows with tree depth and number of worker processes

## Future Improvements

1. **Parallel Processing**: Distribute simulations across CPU cores
2. **Neural Network Integration**: Replace random playouts with learned evaluation
3. **Transposition Tables**: Cache previously evaluated positions
4. **Advanced UCT**: Dynamic exploration constants and move ordering

## References

- [Monte Carlo Tree Search Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monte_Carlo_tree_search)
- Course slides and textbook materials
- Assignment specification (PA3_Game_Playing.pdf)

---
